---
type: "Article"
title: "Why your “bad” music taste probably isn't your fault"
description: "Music is a uniting force in a society where chasms grow ever deeper. It gives life rhythm. It’s what the world relies on to keep on turning. But with nearly 8 billion humans on Earth, our tastes are infinitely unique. Join me as I shred sound to get to the heart of why we are who we are."
subject: "622058"
issue: 1
preview_image: "music1.jpg"
video_url: null
video_title: null
userIDs: ["21bf8680-1107-4bc6-b4d3-19534e357aed"]
articleID: "9e8bc663-bbc9-4096-8c15-8f2d31d4929a"
slug: "/articles/9e8bc663-bbc9-4096-8c15-8f2d31d4929a"
---


## Introduction
To the minority of readers still with me after this statement, I assure you that you will be glad to have stayed. I wish not to insult, judge, marginalise or criticise the one uniqueness we all have in this current period of time. In fact, it is the total opposite. I aim to open your eyes to the psychology and sociology behind music. The way that tiny vibrations in air impact our lives can seem like a web too complex to unravel, with connections in all areas. Religion, culture, media, sport; the list is endless. But with so much variation in genres and experiences, nobody is safe from the criticism of The Masses. This article will explore our relationship with music, why we like what we do, why society says its wrong and how, no matter how hard we try, we cannot change our musical taste. 

## The development of Musical You
Like all tastes, musical preference comes from a plethora of sources. It could be that you discovered disco from a diner in Dublin or revelled in rock in Reading. Our experiences can be as small as a snippet or as long as “Echoes” by Pink Floyd. A musical idea implants itself from the very second it enters our brain, which makes our younger years a melting pot of sound. Our control over what we hear is very limited at a young age, but when we grow older, we gain records, CD’s, and Spotify to satiate our discographic desires. Therefore, our initial uncontrolled impressions can develop and grow as we gain the ability to listen to what we please. However, it is argued to an extent that our likes are partly predefined, linked to our very personality.

It has long been speculated by the intelligentsia that listening to Jazz was only for minds that understood it, hence the stereotype that with academic prowess comes a love of Coltrane. In a study by the University of Texas, they sought out to break down whether personality types affected our musical taste. Using categories of reflective and complex (jazz, classical and folk), upbeat and conventional (country and pop), intense and rebellious (rock, alt and punk) and energetic and rhythmic (hip-hop, soul and funk), they found striking similarities between taste and personality down to details as small as political ideology. For example, if a participant listened to “intense and rebellious” music, a correlation shows they are supportive of the opposition political party to the one in power. Furthermore, those who listen to pop are extroverted and agreeable, but socially and emotionally unstable and those with liberal social ideas do in fact prefer Jazz. Therefore, your music taste is in part out of your hands entirely, with a significant portion being down to your personality.

If you are female between 11 and 14, or male between 13 and 16, go listen to more music now! Seriously, stop reading and go diversify your taste! According to evidence by Stan Stephens-Davidowitz’s study for the New York Times, these are your crucial ages for the creation of your preferences. In studying every Billboard chart-topping track from 1960-2000 and matching it with Spotify data , the favourites of different ages become apparent. The classic teenage tropes of becoming independent and forging your own path are just as applicable to music. Consider the song Creep by Radiohead for example (I can already hear the complaints flying in). The song sits as the 164th most popular song amongst men who are currently 43 years old, but if we look at men 10 years older and younger, the song doesn’t even clock in the top 300. Here it is important to note that the song was released in 1993, when our Radiohead fans were 14 years old, directly in the middle of our age range for men. It is not just isolated to alt indie 90’s rock either and this can be seen in simply talking to your parents about their music taste. The crucial aspect is not entirely when the song was released, rather when you are first introduced to that genre or artist. Just because your Mum’s favourite song is Hound Dog, doesn’t mean she is necessarily 75 years old , just that Elvis came into her musical radar in the above time period. However, the societal pressure of listening to that new album is what drives the previous, and most other examples. Now don’t panic too much, there is still something you can do if you so wish to swap Swift for Slipknot. The study concluded that exposure in our early 20’s is approximately half as influential than that in our teens, with the effect trailing off as one gets older. This continues on until we die, with very small adjustments being made the older we become.

By 33 years old, studies show that people stop seeking out new genres of music and slowly gravitate back to the tunes of their teenage years, seeking the youthful vagrancy, joy and excitement they experienced and therefore associate with the music. When pensioners are studied, this age they seek out is slightly later, in their early 20’s, when their life starts to stabilise and become more carefree. In short, once we pass our crucial years of development, we use our previous music taste to try and return to those years we so dearly miss, instead of broadening our taste to experience something new.

## Lies, lies and more lies
Our music taste is one of the things that comes up time and time again in conversational small talk, whether it be with a friend, colleague, boss, or stranger. It gives us an opportunity to express our likes and dislikes in a supposedly non-judgemental space where we are free to fight The Who against the Supremes. Due to this reflection that certain musical genres are associated with favourable personality types (and this is true to some extent), many people take it to the extreme. An international survey of 8000 adults exposed that 42% of adults will lie about the songs and artists they have listened to in order to seem more sophisticated or rebellious in what is essentially a futile scenario. We also give the excuse of “not wanting to hurt someone’s feelings” when saying we have listened to an artist we have not, with 40% citing this as the reason. This deceit continues into relationships, where 20% of those who lied stating it was to impress a potential partner on a first date.
But is lying really all that bad? Over two thirds of those who stated they had lied, then went on to listen to that song and this will inevitably open up a new possibility for one to affirm their taste, or perhaps discover something they never knew they had liked. This is the beauty of music. Due to our near constant exposure to new sounds, we can have a “musical gap” in our minds which can be filled later in life. One who listens to Jazz and Funk as a teenager will almost certainly enjoy Jamiroquai as an adult even if not experienced before. This is due to how interconnected styles can be and how the enjoyment of certain features are subconsciously stores as a part of your musical taste, awaiting discovery later in life.

## But my taste is better!
Every one of us has met that person who is just better than you because of their taste in music and if you haven’t, well chances are you are that person. Regardless of your 
class, social standing, income, or appearance, some simply consider themselves superior because their little air waves in a specific order are better. 

This is the biggest fallacy you will ever be told.

There is no objective way to qualify music as good or bad other than the number of people to enjoy it. I for one am not a fan of Cubano Pop due to my experiences, cultural upbringing, and exposure. But if I were to claim it was terrible, I would not be thinking rationally at all. There are millions of fans, and it is as futile as trying to say if a food is good or not. In fact, it is even more futile. Whilst many rightly argue that “without music, what are we?”, without food, we are dead. Therefore, if we cannot agree on which foods are the best to keep us alive due to biological necessity and which are the most enjoyable, how can we even begin to comprehend which music “is best for our survival and culture”? Alas, musical purists continue to perpetuate stereotypes to justify their stance. So called “Tasteless” artists like Taylor Swift 1D or Billie Eilish are mainly enjoyed by teenage girls which means it is instantly devoid of value according to society. This ridiculing leaves people feeling isolated from what they enjoy, lest they upset the musical Big Brother, and it can ruin the experience of musical at the most critical time in somebodies’ life.   

The reason behind this obtuseness is simply the passage of time. As time goes on, we remember almost all of the absolute classics, the chart toppers and the “bangers” and a couple of “tragic” songs mocked by the majority. Even these tragedies become popular as the reputation spreads and people listen to it more. Nowadays, the “bad” coexists with the “good” and in 20 years’ time the cycle will repeat itself, but for now we the individuals are stuck with the criticism of the Musical Elite and sometimes the general public as well. Therefore, since your musical ideals will always be held as “bad” for so many, criticism is inescapable, but the joy lies in realising the depth of musical taste, its links to our personality and how it develops in the first place.


Then to summarise, whilst your musical taste will never be identical to anyone else’s, sparking criticism, and it is almost entirely set in stone, we all still relish and savour music. So, ignore the criticism, broaden your taste whilst you still somewhat can and reengage with your musical humanity. Don’t lie about your taste too, but if you do, make good out of it. In attempting to understand and engage with what others find so dear, we better our musical and in fact our entire selves. In essence “All I’m asking, is for a little respect.”

<div id="bibliography">
<h2>Bibliography</h2>

- COO, C., 2022. Inside the audience of Taylor Swift: A deep dive into the success of 'Red (Taylor’s Version)'. [online] Resources.audiense.com. Available at: <https://resources.audiense.com/blog/taylor-swift-red-album-success-what-you-can-learn#:~:text=A%20quick%20report%20from%20Audiense,40.19%25%20between%20ages%2018%2D24> [Accessed 31 August 2022].
- Deezer, 2019. Almost half of us tell ‘musical mistruths,’ global study reveals - Deezer Press. [online] Deezer Press. Available at: <https://www.deezer-blog.com/press/almost-half-of-us-tell-musical-mistruths-global-study-reveals/> [Accessed 31 August 2022].
- Dodgson, L., 2018. We stop discovering new music at age 30, a new survey suggests — here are the scientific reasons why this could be. [online] Business Insider. Available at: <https://www.businessinsider.com/why-we-stop-discovering-new-music-around-age-30-2018-6?r=US&IR=T> [Accessed 31 August 2022].
- Manning-Schaffel, V., 2019. A musicologist explains the science behind your taste in music. [online] NBC News. Available at: <https://www.nbcnews.com/better/lifestyle/musicologist-explains-science-behind-your-taste-music-ncna1018336> [Accessed 31 August 2022].
- Rentfrow, P. and Gosling, S., 2003. The do re mi's of everyday life: The structure and personality correlates of music preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(6), pp.1236-1256.
- Stephens-Davidowitz, S., 2018. Opinion | The Songs That Bind (Published 2018). [online] Nytimes.com. Available at: <https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/10/opinion/sunday/favorite-songs.html> [Accessed 31 August 2022].

</div>