---
type: "Article"
title: "An introduction to Behavioural economics"
description: "A modern replacement to Neoclassical economics?"
subject: "BFAA34"
issue: 1
preview_image: "economics2.jpg"
userIDs: ["v"]
articleID: "5"
slug: "/articles/5"
---

Microeconomics is the study of decision making, and the interaction of producers, consumers and the government in markets. Bits and pieces of economic theory have been mentioned by the Ancient Greeks but in the late 1700s, modern economics came into existence as its own subject, gaining lots of traction until it became one of the most important social sciences in use today.

Neoclassical economics is, broadly speaking, the theory that focuses on demand and supply; the most important determinants of the production, consumption and market price of goods and services. This was revolutionary, as in the 1900s, it changed many economists’ views and influenced classical theory, where costs of production was the most important factor for the market price of goods and services, among other ideas. Nowadays, when we think of economics, our brain goes straight to supply and demand, demonstrating the impact that Neoclassical economics has had on our views. But it’s not only just our views, but our real world actions; our implementation of policy and how we run our businesses. But the Neoclassical theory has been around for a relatively long time from the birth of economics, and makes many assumptions, some of which aren’t completely in line with our world today. This creates some problems when trying to implement this theory; And that’s where Behavioural economics comes in.

Neoclassical economists believe in economic rationality. In theory, consumers always maximise their utility, or firms aim to maximise their long term profit, but there’s so much more to it. When it came to how and why consumers make decisions, Neoclassical economics came up with a few principles, which together make up rational choice. 

One axiom of this theory is that consumers process the information of an economic decision objectively and are not subject to framing manipulation, having fixed preferences. 

Another assumption is that consumer preferences are complete, which means that the consumer will have a preference, and when presented with two goods will be able to say which they like better, or will be completely indifferent. They will not be undecided or get confused on which one to buy, they will either pick one, the other, or neither, and not for the sake of it. 

The third, and possibly most famous, idea of rational choice is the Substitution axiom. It argues that if a consumer has no preference between two goods, then the consumer would be indifferent between two lotteries with those two goods as their prizes. Now this axiom further states that if something identical is removed from those two goods, the consumers would still have the same preference between them; known as the cancellation principle.

Neoclassical economics has so many rules and principles regarding consumer choice and rationality, and after describing a few of them one may question how Behavioural economics ties into any of this. Well, Behavioural economics revolves around the fact that consumers are not rational, and how they can potentially be manipulated into making certain decisions - decisions that consumers think they are making all on their own.

As with most parts of economics, Behavioural economics can be traced back to Adam Smith in the 1700s, who knew that people are overconfident and often overestimate their abilities, which are concepts that can be found in Behavioural economics today. However, it was much later, in the 1980s, when this came into fruition. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman were very active psychologists during this time, identifying key concepts of Behavioural economics, and setting the foundation for future economists to build upon. Most famously, they found that people are subject to framing manipulations, with a theory they called “Prospect theory”. 

For example, most would choose to win £250 guaranteed rather than gamble on a 25% chance of winning £1000 and a 75% chance of winning nothing. However, if presented with the chance to lose £750 guaranteed or a 75% chance to lose £1000 and a 25% chance to lose nothing, most people will risk losing £1000, hoping to lose nothing. What this shows is that people are more likely to take on the risk when trying to avoid a loss rather than gain a profit, which contradicts utility theory.

In the 1980s, Richard Thaler began collaborating with Tversky and Kahneman, and further built upon this work. It was around this period of time where Behavioural economics is said to have properly been created, and Thaler was credited with being its founder, later earning him a Nobel prize in Economic Sciences in 2017. Thaler built the base of Behavioural economics, most famously writing a book in 2008 about the concept of a “nudge”. This concept of a nudge, a way to influence the behaviour of an individual, is now synonymous with Behavioural economics, and it’s all thanks to Thaler.

Looking at real life examples we can see why neoclassical theories may be wrong when it comes to rationality, and Behavioural economics can, to some extent, explain why people do what they do. But Behavioural economics can also be used to help solve market failure. Market failure is where the market doesn’t deliver an efficient allocation of resources; goods are being over/under produced. This is against neoclassical theory as it is stated that markets will reach allocative efficiency, through the power of the “invisible hand”, and when market failure occurs regulation is typically the answer. However, as with any economic decision, there are opportunity costs, for example for the regulation to be effective monitoring and policing is needed. Additionally, bans could lead to illegal activity and regulation could also reduce consumer choice. And this is where the concept of the “nudge” becomes very useful.

In Thalers’ book he sets up a scene of a school cafeteria, and Carolyn, the director for food services, is trying to influence the decisions that the children make, without using typical measures like banning specific foods or likewise. She found that by placing certain foods at eye level, or making separate queues for desserts and main meals, she could increase or decrease the consumption of many food items by up to 25%. These simple small changes can be used to reduce market failure to a certain extent, and with potentially smaller opportunity costs.

However, while this may be used to reduce market failure it can also be used to achieve the opposite. Firms use many ideas of Behavioural economics when making decisions. For example, the concept of the default choice is continually used. Research shows that humans rarely deviate from the default choice, the option that is selected if the consumer selects nothing. Even if people are aware of a change to the default settings or can choose between the default option and another options, many people choose to stick with the default. This is exploited by firms, as if they find any one policy or such gives a better outcome for them, they will simply make it the default.

Another example of how firms use loss aversion to sell is quite commonly found on online shopping sites. Loss aversion is the idea that people dislike losing more than they enjoy winning, meaning they would choose much lower risk options, even if it means drastically reducing the reward, and this can be seen in the Prospect theory example we covered earlier. Shopping sites use phrases like “There’s only one left”, “Limited stock” or “Selling out quickly”, creating a sense of urgency and also fear of missing out. Loss aversion can also apply to social norms, and people trying to not lose in the sense of fitting in. If items are appearing to sell out quickly the risks of not buying are seemingly more than the risk of buying, rushing people to the checkout.

Looking at Behavioural economics on a surface level, it may seem like the solution to all of neoclassicals problems in microeconomics, as it stems from the fact that people don’t always make choices in their best interests, which is entirely what neoclassical theory is based on. However, the rise of Behavioural economics, while having solved problems, has also created problems. It is as writer and philosopher Robert Pirsig says: “every answer leads to ten more questions”. With the discovery of nudges and choice architecture, how the environment of the decision can be used to influence the decision, we realise that all of our decisions, whether intended or not, were made with us being nudged in some direction. And with that we realise that it is impossible to not influence peoples’ decisions, and that there is no such thing as a neutral layout, because it is still a layout. 

Finally, Behavioural economics is still a relatively new concept, and while 2008 may seem like a long time ago, there is still further to go until Behavioural economics will be able to make as much of an impact as neoclassical economics. Additionally, schools of thought such as Keynesian and neuro-economics have helped to make our understanding and practice of economics more informed. Our world is extremely complex, with there being so much that we don’t understand. Behavioural economics models should be used as a tool, alongside Neoclassical and Keynesian models, to help us make some sense of how our economy works, and what we should do to improve it.

<div id="bibliography">
<h2>Bibliography</h2>

- Beggs, Jodi., ThoughtCo. 2022. The Assumptions of Economic Rationality. [online] Available at: <https://www.thoughtco.com/the-assumptions-of-economic-rationality-1147014#:~:text=The%20Rationality%20Assumption%20in%20Neoclassical%20Economics,-PeopleImages%2FGetty%20Images&text=At%20a%20high%20level%2C%20we,rationality%20assumption%20than%20initially%20appears.> [Accessed 1 September 2022].
- Kenton, Will., Investopedia. 2022. Define Neoclassical Economics. [online] Available at: <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/n/neoclassical.asp#:~:text=Neoclassical%20economics%20is%20a%20broad,earlier%20theories%20of%20classical%20economics.> [Accessed 1 September 2022].
- Soman, D., 2013. Behavioural Economics in Action.
- Thaler, R., Sunstein, C. and Pratt, S., 2009. Nudge. [United States]: Gildan Audio.
- Witynski, Max., News.uchicago.edu. 2022. Behavioral economics, explained. [online] Available at: <https://news.uchicago.edu/explainer/what-is-behavioral-economics#:~:text=Behavioral%20economics%20combines%20elements%20of,decisions%20based%20on%20those%20preferences.> [Accessed 1 September 2022].
- En.wikipedia.org. 2022. Economics - Wikipedia. [online] Available at: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economics#Uncertainty_and_game_theory> [Accessed 1 September 2022].

</div>