---
type: "Article"
title: "Mary’s Room: The Thought Experiment Which Shifted Our View Of Reality"
description: ""
subject: "AF70BD"
issue: 2
preview_image: "Mary.jpg"
userIDs: ["k"]
articleID: "28"
slug: "/articles/28"
---
Let me introduce you to Mary—she’s a scientist, and a brilliant one at that. Mary is an expert in the study of colour vision. Yet she lives her life confined to a room where absolutely everything is in black and white. Mary has never seen colours, but she has been able to explore and study the world from a black and white monitor screen. Over time, she has learned absolutely everything about how we experience colours. For example, she has discovered the exact way in which specific wavelengths of light from the sky cause us to picture colours in our heads. She knows how our retina is stimulated, how our central nervous system responds, the way we use “red,” or “blue,” to refer to what we’re seeing…simply put, Mary knows all the physical information that there is to know about colour perception. So, what would happen if one day, Mary was released from her black and white room into the world of colour? Would she learn anything new about colour, or not?

This is the famous 1982 Knowledge Argument, better known to some as “Mary’s Room”, a thought experiment proposed by the philosopher Frank Jackson. It was originally put forward as an argument against Physicalism, which is the view that everything within the universe is made up of physical phenomena. Physicalism suggests that there is nothing to our universe beyond the physical, and nothing, including mental states, that cannot be explained by physical facts. So what implications does Mary have upon this? It seems fairly intuitive to most that even though she knows everything about colour perception, Mary would seem to gain some sort of new information about colour by experiencing it directly, information which she did not possess before. If we admit this, Jackson states, then we’d also have to admit that her original knowledge was in some way incomplete. But Mary originally had all the physical facts about colour perception—nothing’s changed there. Therefore, there must be some information about colour which is non-physical, that is to say, it cannot be reduced to merely physical facts or things. The stance taken by Jackson is that of a dualist point of view, the perspective that there is more to reality than just the physical. Simply put, dualism is the arch-nemesis of physicalism.

This went on to spark much debate in the world of philosophy. A number of responses arose from the physicalists, determined to undermine this thought experiment which posed such a significant threat to their position, should it be correct. An initial and common objection was the ‘ability hypothesis,’ which suggests that Mary does not learn any new facts about colour, and that the only thing she has gained is the ability to perceive it. Laurence Nemirow and David Lewis in particular argued this case, that Mary has discovered a new ability, rather than new facts. They argue that there are different ‘senses’ of knowledge, and that simply knowing physical facts about colour perception is what is known as propositional knowledge, often described as “knowing that”. Lewis suggests that Mary’s newly gained knowledge is not propositional, but rather, ability knowledge—“knowing how,” as he puts it. She has gained “the abilities to remember, imagine, and recognise” colours. Mary can know that the sky is blue, but she has never learned how to recognise a blue sky. Similarly, Nemirow states that “knowing what an experience is like is the same as knowing how to imagine having the experience,” suggesting that Mary has only learned how to do something new.

Pretty straightforward, right? Professor Earl Conee would beg to differ. Specifically, he disagrees with Nemirow’s point as given above. Conee suggests that the ability to imagine an experience is not necessary or sufficient in order for someone to know what it’s actually like to have that experience. As part of his argument, he gifts us with the idea of Martha. Martha is a woman who has the incredible ability to visualise “intermediate shades that she has not experienced, between pairs of shades that she has experienced.” If you give Martha two colours and tell her to visualise a shade midway between them, she can do so very accurately. Conee goes on to tell us that Martha has never seen the shade ‘cherry red,’ and knows nothing of it. But if Martha is told that cherry red lies halfway between burgundy red and fire red, which she has experienced, she is now able to visualise cherry red…should she so choose. This is where Conee makes his distinction—Martha has the ability to imagine cherry red, but unless she actually exercises this ability, she will not have the experience of cherry red. From this, Conee goes on to put forward an alternative way of viewing Mary’s problem—he suggests a third kind of knowledge, which he describes as “acquaintance knowledge.” Conee explains acquaintance knowledge as requiring “the person to be familiar with the known entity in the most direct way that it is possible for a person to be aware of that thing,” which, for Mary, would be the direct phenomenal experience of colour. Mary can know all the propositional knowledge that there is to know about colour, but until she actually has an experience where she directly perceives colour, she lacks acquaintance knowledge. While in her room, Mary has yet to gain acquaintance with colours, but when she does so, she doesn’t learn any new physical facts.

A commonly overlooked case in the knowledge argument, which perhaps should be mentioned more often, is that of Fred, who is Jackson’s other example. He’s not nearly as famous as Mary, but Fred is a man who can distinguish more colours than the average human. Upon being presented with a basket of tomatoes, Fred can see that the basket contains tomatoes of two different shades of red, where everyone else would perceive all the tomatoes to be exactly the same, uniform shade of red. No matter how hard he tries, Fred cannot fully convey to us the difference between the two shades of red, but he is consistently able to discriminate between them. We cannot perceive the same things that Fred can perceive, and Jackson uses this to further evidence what is known as a “phenomenal gap”. Suppose Fred very thoughtfully donates his body to science, and researchers discover the exact differences between his cone cells and ours, and the way that his neurology allows him, with the same stimulus (the tomatoes), to see two shades of red where we only see one. Despite doing all this, we still won’t know exactly what it was like for Fred to perceive these two shades of red. We will never be able to access his perceptual experience with only physical facts, hence there is a gap between what we can discover about Fred’s vision through physical facts, and what it is like to actually see things the way Fred does. Jackson asks us to imagine that we then find a way to surgically alter a normal person’s visual system so that it becomes the same as Fred’s, and they can then perceive colours the same way that he did. He states that upon doing this, the subject would inevitably know more about Fred than they did before the surgery. According to Jackson, this exemplifies the ‘incompleteness’ of physicalism, and supports the dualist view that there must be something more than just the physical facts. This can be subjected to the same critiques as Mary’s scenario, the main difference being that in Fred’s case, we are now the “Marys” of the situation.

Sometimes an objection is raised that as clever as all these arguments are, they remain theoretical. We still don’t actually know what would happen if we had a real-life Mary in her room. Would she even be able to perceive colour, having lived in a black and white world for her whole life? Neuroscientists V.S. Ramachandran and E.M. Hubbard, while writing articles on synesthesia, noted an example which they describe as comparable to Mary's. They discuss the case study of a colourblind man with numerical synaesthesia, who experiences sensations of seeing certain colours when he looks at certain numbers. There are some shades of colour which he is unable to see in the physical world, and has never seen in his life. However, he claimed that when his synaesthesia was triggered, he’d experience, in his mind, colours which he had never seen before in the world, referring to them as “Martian colours”. He could only perceive these colours through his synaesthetic experiences, and not in any other way. This suggests that acquaintance knowledge of colour may not be quite as straightforward as Conee initially thought, and the actuality of it is that there are more complex neurological processes at play when it comes to experiencing colour. Ramachandran and Hubbard do, however, note that even people with synaesthesia who aren’t colourblind claim that the colours they see “seem ‘foreign’, or ‘alien’”, that they are somehow different to normal colours. They account for this using their hypothesis of ‘cross-wiring’ in the brain, that the wiring of nerves in the brain is ‘blended’, and so in synaesthesia the activation of certain brain cells occurs in an indirect and abnormal manner. This messy cross-wiring may result in what they refer to as “noise”, which causes the Martian colours to appear. This doesn’t necessarily mean that it isn’t possible for the colourblind synaesthete to be perceiving the colours his colourblindness prevents him from seeing, but it does add an element of doubt into the equation. Right now, we don’t have enough research to confirm it one way or the other.

As is often the case with philosophical conundrums, the knowledge argument never did reach a decisive conclusion. What it did do was to change the landscape of metaphysics and epistemology—and to this day, philosophers are debating the consequences. But as a concluding remark, it’s interesting to note that Jackson eventually changed his mind about his own thought experiment. He now rejects dualism altogether, and states that the thought experiment itself is flawed. If Mary knows all the physical facts about the process in which we perceive colour, then the process of perceiving colour itself must be a physical one, including the mental processes behind it. This would mean that if the experiment were to work, there couldn’t be mental states which were non-physical. Mary’s experience would be self-contradictory, so Jackson actually goes on to accept physicalism. There are some who switched sides along with him, and there are those who declared that they had been right all along. But, as ever, there are still those who disagree, and in doing so, they keep Mary's legacy alive.

<div id="bibliography">
<h2>Works cited</h2>

Crane, Tim. “Knowledge argument and knowledge.pages.” Tim Crane, http://www.timcrane.com/uploads/2/5/2/4/25243881/knowledge_argument_and_knowledge.pdf. Accessed 21 December 2022.

Flanagan, Owen J., and Owen Flanagan. Consciousness Reconsidered. MIT Press, 1992.

Jackson, Frank. “Epiphenomenal Qualia.” The Philosophical Quarterly, vol. 32, no. 127, 1982, pp. 127-136. Accessed 21 December 2022.

Jackson, Frank. “The knowledge argument, diaphanousness, representationalism.” Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism, 2006. Accessed 21 December 2022.

“Knowledge argument.” Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge_argument. Accessed 21 December 2022.

“Knowledge Argument Against Physicalism.” Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, https://iep.utm.edu/know-arg/. Accessed 21 December 2022.

“Qualia: The Knowledge Argument (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 3 September 2002, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qualia-knowledge/. Accessed 21 December 2022.

Ramachandran, Vilayanur S., and Edward M. Hubbard. “More Common Questions about Synesthesia.” Scientific American, 14 April 2003, https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/more-common-questions-abo-2003-04-14/. Accessed 21 December 2022.

Speaks, Jeff. Objections to the knowledge argument, 4 October 2018, https://www3.nd.edu/~jspeaks/courses/2018-19/30304/handouts/objections-knowledge-argument.pdf. Accessed 21 December 2022.

Stoljar, Daniel. “Physicalism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 13 February 2001, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/physicalism/#QualCons. Accessed 21 December 2022.

Sullivan, EJ, et al. “Metaphysics.” Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metaphysics. Accessed 21 December 2022.

“VS Ramachandran and EM Hubbard - Synaesthesia — A Window Into Perception, Thought and Language.” The Center for Brain and Cognition, http://chip.ucsd.edu/pdf/Synaesthesia%20-%20JCS.pdf. Accessed 21 December 2022.

“What Did Mary Know? | Issue 99.” Philosophy Now, https://philosophynow.org/issues/99/What_Did_Mary_Know. Accessed 21 December 2022.

“Frank Jackson’s ‘Epiphenomenal Qualia’ | by Paul Austin Murphy.” Medium, 19 January 2020, https://medium.com/@paulaustinmurphy2000/frank-jacksons-epiphenomenal-qualia-9b588d595538. Accessed 2 January 2023.

Jackson, Frank. THE KNOWLEDGE ARGUMENT, http://mypages.iit.edu/~schmaus/Philosophy_of_Mind/lectures/Jackson.htm. Accessed 2 January 2023.

Jackson, Frank. “The Qualia Problem.” rintintin.colorado.edu, https://rintintin.colorado.edu/~vancecd/phil201/Jackson.pdf. Accessed 2 January 2023.

</div>