---
type: "Article"
title: "Economic inequality in India"
description: ""
subject: "BFAA34"
issue: 2
preview_image: "Inequality.jpg"
userIDs: ["aa"]
articleID: "24"
slug: "/articles/24"
---

Economic inequality refers to the disparities in income, wealth and opportunity among individuals or households within a country. India gained independence from British rule in 1947, and since then, the country has undergone significant economic and social changes. One important aspect of these changes has been the impact on economic inequality, which will be discussed in this article.

Before independence, India was a colony of the British Empire and was subject to several economic policies that contributed to inequality. For example, the British used a system of land revenue that disproportionately benefited large landlords and discriminated against small farmers and implemented policies that favoured certain industries, such as textiles, at the expense of others. The British also imposed high tariffs on Indian goods, which made it difficult for Indian businesses to compete with British products. These policies contributed to a highly unequal distribution of wealth and income in India.

Since independence, India has implemented several policies and initiatives to address economic inequality and promote economic development. One key policy has been land reform, which has aimed to redistribute land from large landlords to small farmers; this has helped to reduce the concentration of land ownership and increase the income and wealth of small farmers. Other initiatives have included the further development of infrastructure, such as roads, ports, and airports, which has helped to stimulate economic growth and create employment opportunities, especially since most of the income generated remains within the country instead of being sent back to Britain.

One of the most significant changes in economic inequality in India post-independence has been the overall reduction in poverty. Reports from the World Bank state the percentage of the population living in absolute poverty has fallen from around 60% in the early 1990s to around 21% in 2011. This decrease in poverty can be attributed to a few factors, including economic growth, government programs aimed at reducing poverty and increased access to education and healthcare. One government program that has had a significant impact on poverty in India is the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), introduced in 2006, which provides a legal guarantee of 100 days of paid employment each year to rural households. The program has been successful in providing employment to millions of rural households and has consequently contributed to a reduction in poverty in rural areas.

However, while poverty has decreased overall, high levels of economic inequality still exist. One factor contributing to this is the persistent disparities in income and wealth between urban and rural areas. Despite efforts to develop rural areas and improve the standard of living in these areas, urban areas continue to have higher incomes and greater access to education and healthcare. For example, surveys from the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) shows that in 2011, the average monthly per capita consumption expenditure (MPCE) in urban areas was Rs 1,109, while in rural areas it was Rs 868. This disparity in consumption expenditure indicates that households in urban areas have higher incomes and greater purchasing power than those in rural areas.

Another factor contributing to economic inequality in India is the unequal distribution of wealth. Credit Suisse has recently concluded that the top 1% of earners in India account for around 22% of the country's total wealth, while the bottom 60% of earners hold just 4% of the country's wealth. This unequal distribution of wealth has been driven in part by the rapid growth of the country's secondary and tertiary sectors, which has benefited some segments of the population more than others. This effect has been combined with no inheritance taxes resulting in the majority of national wealth accumulating within affluent families over a number of years. The growth of the country's service sector, which accounted for around 60% of India's GDP in 2011, has disproportionately benefited skilled workers with higher levels of education. This has contributed to an increase in income inequality, as skilled workers have seen their incomes rise faster than those of unskilled workers.

Discrimination based on factors such as caste and gender continue to play a role in economic inequality in India, where lower caste individuals and women are often paid less for the same work as their higher caste and male counterparts and tend to face barriers to education and employment opportunities. Data from the International Labour Organization (ILO) shows that in 2011, the gender pay gap in India was around 27%, due in part to the fact that women are often concentrated in lower-paying occupations and may face discrimination in the labour market.

One of the more notable contributors of economic inequality is corruption. When public officials engage in corrupt practices, they may direct resources towards projects or individuals that benefit them personally, rather than towards projects or individuals that will have the greatest public benefit. This can result in a misallocation of resources, with some sectors or regions receiving more funding than others and can lead to a further concentration of wealth and income. Whilst the Indian government have recently implemented multiple laws to reduce corruption, such as The Whistleblowers Protection Act (2014) and The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act (2013), it will take many years before large-scale corruption is eradicated considering how regular enforcement has to be across the entire country.

Overall, while there have been significant changes in economic inequality in India post-independence, including a reduction in poverty, disparities in income and wealth between urban and rural areas, and an unequal distribution of wealth, continue to persist. Addressing these issues will be critical to ensuring that the country's economic growth benefits all members of society.
