---
type: "Article"
title: "Telomeres: What is stress doing to your body?"
description: "“Don’t stress so much, they say you’ll die young!” Ever wondered how much truth is behind that saying? How much does stress affect us? Where exactly do mind and body meet? Well, the key to answering these questions goes right down to a cellular level."
subject: "2BB760"
issue: 2
preview_image: "Telomere.jpg"
userIDs: ["d"]
articleID: "33"
slug: "/articles/33"
---

There are components of a cell’s nuclei, in part in the DNA, that act as the equivalent of a ticking time bomb, counting the minutes until a cell’s programmed self-destruction. And factors like stress are just what they need to cut that time into just a small fraction of itself.

## Meet the telomere:
In truth, these ticking time bombs are made up of several factors all working in conjunction with each other. Still, the first and perhaps most important factor is our telomeres, located at the end of every chromosome in our body. These telomeres are nothing but a set length of repeating genetic code, in the case of humans, this is “TTAGGG”. Naturally, this is non-coding DNA and therefore is not a gene that the body uses to make proteins. It is instead used as the body’s sacrificial metal. Much like the aglet on the end of a shoelace, telomeres prevent chromosomes from fraying as well as generally decrease the chance of random mutation during replication. But what do they have to do with whether the cell lives or dies? Well, when a cell is created, the telomeres on its chromosomes are a certain length, and with every replication, this length decreases. This is because our replicative enzymes are incapable of copying the full length of DNA with every replication (the end-replication problem), so, instead of losing valuable genes, the body’s failsafe is to lose a bit of the telomere every time. There are only a certain number of times the cell can replicate before we still risk losing genetic material though as our telomeres are not infinite, and this is defined as the cell’s Hayflick limit. Cells go through replicative senescence and then apoptosis once their telomeres reach a “critical length”, after which replication would result in the loss of crucial coding DNA. The death of cells is a natural part of life, and when the rate at which they die is gradually greater than the rate at which they are replenished, we have colloquially coined this as “ageing”. 

## What decides the rate of telomere attrition?:
Dr Elizabeth Blackburn, PhD, and her colleagues are credited with the discovery of telomeres. It began with experimentation on single-celled organisms called Tetrahymena, which seemingly never died. Upon examination, their research revealed that the Tetrahymena had ever-replenishing telomeres, which essentially made them immortal, if not affected by external factors. This led to the discovery of a crucial enzyme they called “telomerase”, which lengthened the telomeres – so long as these organisms had telomerase levels high enough to counteract their telomere attrition, their telomeres never reached the critical length that led to apoptosis and therefore death. This was proven when they experimented by removing the telomerase in these organisms, which quickly led to death. This process is much the same in humans, and telomere length homeostasis is maintained by the delicate balance between telomerase levels and telomere attrition. However, as humans are much more complex than unicellular organisms, we cannot simply increase our telomerase levels and never die. Doing this leads us into the dangerous territory of uncontrolled replication, also known as cancer. As Dr Blackburn describes it, we humans live on a “knife’s edge” and one tip to the left may save us from age-related degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s, but may instead make us the victims of dangerous tumours.

## What’s stress got to do with it?:
Telomerase levels and telomere lengths are also affected by many external factors, one of which is stress. Stress responses, especially prolonged ones, lead to long-term exposure of telomeres to cortisol, the stress hormone, and this has been shown to reduce telomerase levels. This leads to cells dying earlier, but that is not the worst of it. These cells could either go through apoptosis, and therefore only affect themselves, or become pro-inflammatory which is a much more sinister alternative. These cells then release proinflammatory cytokines, often associated with an immune response, that act on a positive feedback loop in other senescent cells, producing even more proinflammatory cytokines in turn. This eventually leads to chronic inflammation which has been proven to exacerbate telomere attrition. This shift in the immune system has been coined “inflamm-ageing” and while no concrete link has been made between this process and the onset of age-related diseases such as atherosclerosis, it is a concerning association.

However, all hope is not lost. Many studies show that the negative impacts of social stressors, whether this is war and famine, or unemployment and overall poor quality of life on telomere length can largely be reversed.

## Mindfulness – any merit?:
While many people like to smugly proclaim that there is no benefit to the meditation and mindfulness that have become increasingly popular in recent years, science unfortunately disagrees. Studies have proven that actively taking a moment to check in with oneself and remove outward stressors, for even a few minutes a day, significantly improves telomerase levels.

The aim of these methods is to reduce the length of time that stress factors affect your body. Those with anxiety disorders, those who place a lot of weight on outcomes or events that aren’t necessarily catastrophic, and those with serotonin-sensitive genotypes are more weakened by a stressful environment and often have prolonged stress responses. They worry in the lead-up to the event, their stress peaks during the actual event, and afterwards, the stress takes a while to wear off. The impact is seen on their telomeres which shorten at a much more rapid pace over time. In an ideal world, an individual would approach every event with a “challenge” mindset instead of a “threat” mindset, allowing them to harness stress as a useful tool, reduce the peak of stress during the event, and very quickly recover from its impacts afterwards.

The benefits of a “challenge” mindset were found in a study conducted by Dr. Elissa Epel and Dr. Elizabeth Blackburn, who worked to measure the telomeres of caregiving mothers who were, as expected, under constant stress. Amazingly, the study provided a clear link that the longer the mothers had been caregiving, the shorter their telomeres. However, an even more interesting finding was the anomalies, where some mothers who had been caregiving for long periods had much longer telomeres than expected. These mothers were shown to have “challenge” mindsets and reacted to their daily stress in a much healthier way, which actively improved their telomere health.

While this mindset is not the reality for many of us, methods such as mindfulness in which we take a moment to evaluate the real-life impacts of an upcoming stressful event, remove that stress from our immediate thoughts, and instead focus on reconnecting with our bodies can help us start on a journey towards healthier coping mechanisms.

However, mindfulness may not be the method that works best for you. The key here is to find a coping mechanism that allows you to disconnect from the “all-or-nothing” stress mindset and relax, allowing your body to recover and recuperate.  This may be found in reading, listening to music, light exercise, spending time with your pets, or knitting for example. Whatever works, including these methods in your life will work towards improving your quality of life both in the present and in the future. While there is no miracle cure as of yet to dramatically extend lifespan, taking care to manage your stress response is key to at least extending your health span, increasing the number of years you spend with the quality of life you deserve.

Another factor that is scientifically proven to improve telomere health is the consumption of fruit and vegetables high in antioxidants, like berries. The body has a natural process of producing free radicals during the production of ATP in both aerobic and anaerobic respiration. These free radicals are also created through prolonged exposure to stress, carcinogens, and ionising radiation. The liver naturally produces antioxidants to balance this free radical generation and this prevents oxidative stress. However, as stressors and exposure increase in external factors, this balance is often tipped, leading to oxidative stress which once again contributes to chronic inflammation. Therefore, topping up your antioxidant levels through the consumption of berries, broccoli, spinach, carrots, etc. will help to counteract the onset of oxidative stress and telomere attrition.

## Impacts of these findings on healthcare:
In an ideal world, these findings would have revolutionised the healthcare industry. Individualised treatment with the incorporation of the best stress-relief method for each patient should theoretically improve recovery quality and shorten its time as well. While this is an unrealistic implementation on a hospital-wide scale, the finding is still useful for patients in permanent care such as those in tertiary care settings like hospices.

## Other impacts of telomeres:
Another factor that affects telomere length is genetics. Scientifically, this is easily explained. The embryo is formed from the sex cells of a maternal and paternal parent, and so the child inherits the parents’ telomeres. However, this has a very unfortunate impact on children born into difficult situations or areas particularly rife with social stressors such as warzones. This is because the parents have already experienced a great deal of stress and possess significantly eroded telomeres, so their children begin life already at a disadvantage. This highlights the importance of decreasing social stressors for disadvantaged individuals, as the circumstances come with significant detriment to not just their lives, but also the lives of their children starting from birth.

However, a scientist called Dan Eisenberg proposed the “thrifty telomere hypothesis” for telomere attrition, suggesting that with the body’s finite energy resources, the allocation of that energy to things other than DNA replication led to greater telomere attrition over time. This is in line with Kirkwood’s “disposable soma theory” which is still a point of contention in scientific circles. Eisenberg conducted an interesting study into the reproduction ages of paternal parents and the telomere lengths of their offspring and found a possible signalling link between parent and child. As the age of reproduction increased in paternal parents, their children’s telomeres were longer, suggesting a possibility that the low mortality environment necessary for the parent’s survival to such an old age signalled to the child’s genetic material that this child was also likely to grow to an older age before reproduction. So, the opposite impact of stress was found as these children’s bodies prepared them to live expected long and healthy lives. 

Telomeres are also not just a promising finding for humans. These are potential biomarkers of stress that could revolutionise the way treatment is provided in fields such as veterinary medicine. If studies could be conducted to quantify the effect of certain stressors on telomere length, then it could be a simple case of examining an animal’s telomeres and comparing it to some handy graphs to find out the animal’s stress history and so provide more accurate and personalised treatment.

## To conclude:
The discovery of telomeres and the subsequent research conducted have already revolutionised the way we see healthcare, social stressors, and disease. It has highlighted the important practice of holistic care that the NHS has already adopted. It also shows us that we have control of our bodies to a very large extent and can take simple measures, whether that is by adjusting our mindsets, diets, or social environments, to ensure our health span is as long as it has the potential to be. And research has only just begun. More studies need to be conducted to continue changing the way we provide treatment and go about our lives, but already the potential this field has is incredibly exciting.

<div id="bibliography">
<h2>Bibliography</h2>

- https://www.yourgenome.org/facts/what-is-a-telomere/ 
- https://www.ted.com/talks/elizabeth_blackburn_the_science_of_cells_that_never_get_old?language=en 
- https://podcasts.ox.ac.uk/telomeres-integrative-markers-exposure-stress-and-adversity-systematic-review-and-meta-analysis 
- The Telomere Effect - Elissa Epel and Elizabeth Blackburn
- https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6223848/ 
- https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21319244/ 
- https://www.stjohns.health/documents/content/top-20-foods-high-in-antioxidants.pdf 
- https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3249911/
- https://jmhg.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s43042-022-00335-4 

</div>