---
type: "Article"
title: "Why we need farming to save the climate"
description: ""
subject: "C8792C"
issue: 2
preview_image: "Cow.jpg" #Alley cropping
userIDs: ["aj"]
articleID: "21"
slug: "/articles/21"
---

The current climate situation frequents our thoughts more often, which may be as a result of the record drought of summer 2022 in the UK or the more extreme weather events we see in the news, like Pakistan’s deadly floods. We know for certain that humanity’s unprecedented emission of carbon into the atmosphere has accelerated the greenhouse effect – trapping more heat in the atmosphere – leading to a whole host of serious impacts (including sea level rise, ice melting, more intense weather events and habitat loss). As a result, we are desperately searching for drastic climate change solutions. I would like to suggest that making small alterations to the way we farm will not only improve our resilience but actually act as a carbon sink, becoming a player in reducing atmospheric carbon.

Agriculture has been named as one of the world’s biggest emitters of carbon, with an estimated 23% of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions coming from agriculture, forestry and other land uses. This is a huge portion of our emissions - surprisingly, it is more than all the emissions from transport combined (16.2%). However, taking a step back, it becomes more understandable when considering the number of people who need feeding and thus the vast scale of agriculture. An estimated 30-47% of the world's ice-free land surface is used for agriculture and, since 1961, the total production of cereal crops has increased by 240% up to 2017. In addition to a population boom, the discovery and subsequent use of synthetic fertilisers, a total disregard for the health of farmed land and a sharp rise in meat consumption has caused severe environmental degradation and has been a significant contributor to climate change. The growing practice of intensive farming - the maximum output of food produced in the most efficient way possible - is largely responsible for this.

The thought of factory farms may spring to mind - feedlots packed with livestock; food brought to their mouths, so they don’t waste energy moving; animals not even seeing a blade of grass before they are slaughtered as early as possible for quick profit, ready for the next batch to move in. This depressing practice is realistic in many parts of the world and completely disregards the environment, although, thankfully, policies which enforce high animal welfare standards and protect the environment prevent this in most developed nations. For example, the EU’s “Farm to Fork” strategy enforces good farming practices, attempting to have a neutral or positive impact on the environment in the production of food.

## Farming as a climate change mitigator
Evidently, a solution is needed to minimise the impact farming has on the environment. While in reality, this involves a vastly complicated and entangled range of factors – for example, not wasting a third of our food worldwide, decreasing meat consumption and reducing the distance our food travels – this article will focus on sustainable farming rather than consumers’ habits. Sustainable farming means food is produced on land in such a way that production can be continued indefinitely. Although the annual yield per unit of land will be lower, as intensive techniques that degrade the soil aren’t employed, in the long term, being able to produce food at a steady yield each year forever (in theory) will enable true food security. 

## Soil
Soil is made up of four basic components – minerals, water, air, and organic matter. Minerals are bits of sands, silts and clays which then create pores (or gaps) between each grain of material, where water and air can reside. Organic matter, often referred to as humus, is any organic material that is within the soil and is the main source of microbial activity. As long as soil is moist, airy and rich in organic matter, it will be thriving with microorganisms which decompose organic matter to release energy. Such healthy soil is able to trap carbon dioxide, as it binds to minerals, meaning it plays a significant role in the climate crisis. Furthermore, organic matter on its own is sequestering carbon as, on average, 50-58% of organic matter is carbon. Considering how much soil covers the Earth’s surface and given that such a large portion of land is used for farming, it seems obvious that it must be managed to increase the amount of carbon stored in this sink.

When soil has a very active population of microorganisms, the cycle of nutrients within the soil is greatened, thus better supporting crop growth. There is a mutual relationship between soil organisms and plants, as roots deposit large amounts of carbon into the soil to nourish microorganisms. In return, microbes carry out nitrogen fixation and nutrient mineralisation – putting molecules into forms that roots can absorb by diffusion – accelerating the growth of the plant. Modern-day farming uses synthetic fertilisers to do this instead, with mineralised nutrients (that have been produced off site) being directly applied. However, these chemicals have a negative impact, reducing soil activity. This is demonstrated by the decreased activity of nematodes after the application of synthetic fertiliser - a good indicator as the nematode family is one of the biggest populations of organisms found in the rhizosphere (the soil around plant roots), which is arguably the most important region of soil for organism activity. 

To many people this might beg the question, “Why does it matter if fertilisers are reducing soil life when they are so good at producing more food?”. The answer lies within how sustainable synthetic fertilisers are to produce and use. The Haber Process, which is the technique used in the manufacturing processes of the most common fertilisers, uses hydrogen extracted from natural gas, depleting reserves. It also emits large quantities of greenhouse gases through the high energy demand of producing the high temperature and pressure needed for the reaction and the transportation to farms. Furthermore, as already discussed, applying a fertiliser to soils reduces the activity and diversity of the organisms within the soil. This has a knock on effect on the nutrient recycling capabilities of the soil, therefore providing fewer nutrients to the dependent plants but also reducing the carbon sequestration effect of the soil. This, along with tillage (disruption of the soil using machinery), is what is causing soil degradation and resulting in carbon being released into the atmosphere from its store in the soil.

Farming sustainably is therefore centred around the health of the soil.

## Steps to make farming sustainable
So far, the use of livestock has had little mention. However, they play an instrumental role in an ideal sustainable farming operation. The use of forage (most often this is grass) and livestock (usually cattle) is one of the best ways of restoring soil ecosystems and drawing down atmospheric carbon. This works as forage absorbs carbon dioxide from the air and is then digested to be mostly returned to the ground as a manure which builds up the humus of the soil. This supports the growth of biodiversity in the soil, which in turn helps to cycle nutrients faster. Furthermore, with a regenerative grazing scheme, it is low input – it requires no fertiliser as that is effectively being done by the manure and no intensive operations like tillage or ploughing are needed to disrupt the carefully constructed ecology and structure of the soil. This is a win-win scenario where the farmer has to do little to manage the land and yet gets rewarded by a healthy soil and some meat produce.

The concept outlined above is called ‘agro-ecology’ which is described as applying ecological principles to an agricultural setting. The use of livestock can work within crop rotation: instead of continuously growing monocultures of cereal crops every year in the same field (which causes degradation of soil and biodiversity), fields can be given ‘recovery periods’ where forage crops can be sown and herds of cattle can intensively graze small sections of the field before being moved on. The effects of this are a build up of organic matter and a regeneration of the soil ecosystem so that when a cash crop is planted the next year, it has a soil full of decomposers and nutrients to support strong growth of the crop. This also comes with additional benefits of greater moisture retention and a better symbiosis between the plants and rhizosphere, aiding the growth of the plant and its resilience to events such as drought.

Unfortunately, this is rarely considered throughout the world, likely due to a complicated range of factors including local climate, economics, cultures and education. It may be considered a poor use of land as it puts areas out of intense productivity for extended periods of time and farmers don’t think they can afford to lose productive land. This is especially the case when crops are being damaged and lost from natural hazards (which are becoming more frequent and severe) or when governments fail to recognise the benefits of ecology in a farming background and don’t provide financial incentives. A positive feedback loop is therefore created, where there is a rush to produce more food in an unsustainable way, due to the pressure from increasing demand, resulting in the environment and climate taking a hit. This creates a further pressure for food, causing a spiral.

In the UK, we have the Environmental Stewardship Scheme where farmers get paid per hectare to manage land in an environmentally friendly way and there are certain criteria that farmland has to meet depending on the level of scheme that farmers have applied for. This aims to make it worthwhile for farmers to prioritise the environment on their land, as they can afford a decrease in productivity if the government provides compensation. This is a great example of environmentally friendly farming systems finally being given the attention they deserve and being recognised as an effective way to rejuvenate degraded land, increase carbon sinks and protect food security.

## Conclusion
With agriculture being both fundamental in supporting the human population and a key player in the climate crisis, it must be viewed by governments and the public not as an enemy to climate change but as an essential tool to mitigate it. In order to sustainably utilise land for farming, we need to understand that the health of the soil is paramount and that allowing it to recover is far more important than attempting to farm it intensively until it becomes too degraded to use. It is unfair on farmers to blame them for their actions when they are simply trying to meet the demand for food and earn a living. Instead, shedding light on this issue and creating more awareness will lead to more governments making significant changes to agricultural policies, having a far more widespread and positive effect.

<div id="bibliography">
<h2>Bibliography</h2>

DeGomez, T., Kolb, P. and Kleinman, S. (2019) Basic Soil Components – Climate, Forests and Woodlands. Available at: https://climate-woodlands.extension.org/basic-soil-components/ (Accessed: 28 November 2022).

England, N. (2013) Higher Level Stewardship: Environmental Stewardship Handbook, Fourth Edition – January 2013 - NE350, Natural England - Access to Evidence. Available at: http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/publication/2827091  (Accessed: 30 November 2022).

European Commission (2022) Farm to Fork Strategy. Available at: https://food.ec.europa.eu/horizontal-topics/farm-fork-strategy_en  (Accessed: 27 November 2022).

GOV UK (2022) Agreement holders’ information: Environmental Stewardship, GOV.UK. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/environmental-stewardship  (Accessed: 30 November 2022).

Hawken, P. (ed.) (2017) Drawdown: The Most Comprehensive Plan Ever Proposed to Reverse Global Warming a book by Paul Hawken. Penguin Books.

Herren, G.L. et al. (2020) ‘Effects of synthetic fertilizer and farm compost on soil nematode community in long-term crop rotation plots: A morphological and metabarcoding approach’, PLOS ONE. Edited by R. Paradelo Núñez, 15(3), p. e0230153. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230153. 

IPCC (2019) Climate Change and Land: IPCC Special Report on Climate Change, Desertification, Land Degradation, Sustainable Land Management, Food Security, and Greenhouse Gas Fluxes in Terrestrial Ecosystems. 1st edn. Cambridge University Press. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157988. 

Mondelaers, K., Aertsens, J. and Van Huylenbroeck, G. (2009) ‘A meta-analysis of the differences in environmental impacts between organic and conventional farming’, British Food Journal, 111, pp. 1098–1119. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1108/00070700910992925. 

Ritchie, H., Roser, M. and Rosado, P. (2020) CO₂ and Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Our World in Data. Available at: https://ourworldindata.org/emissions-by-sector  (Accessed: 27 November 2022).

Soil Association (2022) What is agroecology? | Soil Association. Available at: https://www.soilassociation.org/causes-campaigns/a-ten-year-transition-to-agroecology/what-is-agroecology/  (Accessed: 20 April 2022).

Teague, R. and Kreuter, U. (2020) ‘Managing Grazing to Restore Soil Health, Ecosystem Function, and Ecosystem Services’, Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems, 4. Available at: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fsufs.2020.534187  (Accessed: 4 May 2022).

Vogel, C. et al. (2014) ‘Submicron structures provide preferential spots for carbon and nitrogen sequestration in soils’, Nature Communications, 5(1), p. 2947. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms3947. 

</div>